---
index: 3
title: "Top 5 React Hooks"
date: "13-03-2023"
layout: "../../layouts/blogLayout.astro"
description:
  "There are a total of 42 React hooks so far, but not all of them see much use.
  I've compiled together a list of the top 5 hooks that will most defintely be
  in your next React application."
tags: ["React"]
---

## What are React hooks?

Hooks are React's way of reusing Javascript functions that allow you to manage
the React lifecycle. Hooks can be easily called inside React functions or at the
top of a component, but not inside a class. They were introduced so that we
wouldn't have to use classes to manipulate and add states. They are also used to
manage side effects of a component. There are a total of 42 React hooks so far,
but not all of them see much use. I've compiled together a list of the top 5
hooks that I'd recommend for your next React application. The main types of
React hooks are given below:

- State Hooks: These hooks remembers any input given by the client and store it.
  They can be used to store any type of variable, such as a string, number or an
  object. They can also be passed as props to other components. They can be
  created using the `useState()` hook.
- Effect Hooks: These hooks are used to track the side effects of a component.
  They can be used to fetch data, update the DOM for a specific condition or
  track a state to check if it has satisfied a certain check. They can be
  created using the `useEffect()` hook.
- Ref Hooks: These hooks are used to locate and reference a value locally in a
  component. When a re-render is executed, the value stored inside a `useRef()`
  is not affected, whereas a normal variable's value is reset.
- Context Hooks: These hooks are used to create a global state that can be
  accessed by any component. They can be created using the `useContext()` hook.
- Performance Hooks: These hooks are used to improve the performance of a
  component. They can be created using the `useMemo()` and `useCallback()`
  hooks.
- Custom Hooks: These hooks are created by the developer to reuse code. They can
  be created using the `useCustom()` hook.

## 1. useState()

`useState()` is by far one of the most popular hooks used by React developers.
It allows the client to store any **type** of variable inside it, whereas
classes only allow the state to be an object. It can also be passed as props to
other components. `useState()` has one prop that can be passed into it, which is
the initial state. This initial state is assigned to the useState on the initial
render of the web application. We receive two things from `useState()`: The
state and a function to set a value to the state.

Take the example given below. We first import `useState()` from "react" and then
create a state called `text` which will have an initial value of "Hello World!".
We can use TypeScript to define a type for this state, which in the first case
is a string. The same is done for the `number` state.

```ts
import { useState } from "react";

function Component() {
  const [text, setText] = useState<string>("Hello World!");
  const [number, setNumber] = useState<number>(0);
}
```

`setText` and `setNumber` are functions which are used to set values for their
respective states. We can use these functions to set a new state or perform
operations on previous stored states. For example, given below for the state
`number`, we increment it by 1 on the click of a button:

```jsx
function Component() {
  return (
    <button
      onClick={() => {
        setNumber(number + 1);
      }}
    >
      Click Me!
    </button>
  );
}
```

## 2. useEffect()

`useEffect()`, one of the most useful hooks in React. React works on the concept
of re-rendering a page when there is an update to a state. It can be used to
track when these states are changed and execute a function each time.
`useEffect()` is useful because it allows you to track the side effects of any
component and is particularly useful for fetching data, updating the DOM for a
specific condition or tracking a state to check if it has satisfied a certain
check.

`useEffect()` takes in two props: a setup function, which runs after a render is
executed and an optional dependency prop which can track a certain state or run
on the initial render of the application. The setup function can also have an
optional cleanup function after it, which executes before the component is
unmounted.

```jsx
import { useEffect, useState } from "react";

function Component() {
  const [counter, setCounter] = useState < number > 0;
  useEffect(() => {
    const counter = setInterval(() => {
      setCounter(num + 1);
    }, 3000);

    return () => clearInterval(interval);
  }, [num]);
}
```

In the above example, we have created a state, `counter`, which will keep track
of a number. We have a seperate variable defined somewhere else in our file
called `num`. When `num` is changed, the useEffect function will run the
setInterval function, which will increment the `counter` state every 3000
milliseconds. The cleanup function runs before unmounting.

We can also set the `useEffect()` hook to only run on the initial render of the
web application. We can do this by setting the optional dependency as `[]`. In
the example below, we send a fetch request to our test server and then log the
data to the console. The initial render is executed twice because React mounts
the component, unmounts it and then remounts it.

Keep in mind, you should never update a state inside a `useEffect()` which is
being tracked, as this can cause an infinite loop of re-rendering.

```jsx
import { useEffect } from "react";

function Component() {
  useEffect(() => {
    fetch("https://servertest.com")
      .then((res) => res.json())
      .then((data) => console.log(data))
      .catch((err) => {
        console.log(err);
      });
  }, []);
}
```

## 3. useRef()

`useRef()` is a React hook mainly used to locate and reference a value locally
in a component. When a re-render is executed, the value stored inside a
`useRef()` is not affected, whereas a normal variable's value is reset. It also
does not cause a re-render when the value is changed, unlike a state. Its value
cannot be shared outside its component unlike variables. Some important things
to keep in mind about `useRef()` is that it's value should not be changed or
read during the rendering of your web application. It value should be
changed/read as a side effect to another event, such as clicking a button or on
a response from a promise.

In order to use `useRef()`, we'll first import it from "react" and create a ref
object called `counterRef`, as shown below. We'll give it an initial value of 0.
On clicking the button, it'll increment the ref's value by 1 and log it to the
console.

```jsx
import { useRef } from "react";

function Component() {
  const counterRef = useRef < number > 0;
  function IncrementRef() {
    counterRef.current = counterRef.current + 1;
    console.log("The current value of counterRef is " + counterRef);
  }
  return (
    <div>
      <button onClick={IncrementRef}>Click me to increment the ref!</button>
    </div>
  );
}
```

### DOM Manipulation with useRef()

This is mostly what `useRef()` is used for in React projects: manipulating the
DOM by giving a ref to a JSX/TSX component and executing a function as a side
effect. Given below is an example of a button component shifting the client's
focus to an input box using `useRef()`

```jsx
import { useRef } from "react";

function Component() {
  const ref = useRef(null);
  function FocusOnInput() {
    ref.current.focus();
  }
  return (
    <div>
      <input ref={ref} placeholder="Input Box" type="text" />
      <button onClick={FocusOnInput}>Click Me!</button>
    </div>
  );
}
```

## 4. useMemo()

`useMemo()` is a React hook used to cache the result of a calculation function
in between re-renders. It is very optimized as it compares the current value and
previous value of the arguments for any updates. If there is no change, it
returns the previous result.

Given below is an example of `useMemo()` in action. It takes in two arguments, a
calculateValue function and dependecies. The dependencies contain the variables
whose values will be tracked for any updates. The calculateValue function will
run everytime there is a change in the dependecies and on the initial render.
This function should be pure (the result depends on the arguments) and take no
arguments.

```jsx
import { useMemo } from "react";

function Component() {
  const testMemo = useMemo(
    () => calculateValuesFunction(testVariable, testVariable2),
    [testVariable, testVariable2]
  );
}
```

## 5. useId()

`useId()` is a React hook which is used to return a uniquely generated ID to be
passed in accessibility attributes and finds use especially for forms. It
shouldn't be used to generate unique ID keys for user data, but only for
uniquely identifying certain attributes. `useId()` takes in no parameters.

In the example below, we first import `useId()` from "react". We then create a
unique ID in a variable `passwordID`, which will be used to identify unique
accessibility attributes. What is an accessibility attribute? It's a way of
connecting two HTML elements through the use of `area-describeby` and `id`. When
we use multiple instances of the same component in a parent component, without
`useId()`, the attributes end up being the same for all the instances. This
leads to accessibility issues. `useId()` solves this problem by generating a
unique ID for each instance of the component.

```jsx
import { useId } from "react";

function Component() {
  const passwordID = useId();
  return (
    <div>
      <label aria-describedby={passwordID}>Enter Password</label>
      <input id={passwordID} placeholder="Password" type="text" />
    </div>
  );
}
```
